Updated 28 May 2015
Omar Malik, Santa Barbara, CA

1. Filename of the data layer: po_wastewater_gl2015.csv; 2. Identify the target for this data layer: goal, sub-goal, pressures, or resilience: Pressures Layer, OR Clean Waters goal status; 3. Short title of the data layer (for the 'name' column in `layers.csv`): Percentage of wastewater treated;
4. One-sentence explanation of the data layer (for the 'description' column in `layers.csv`): The percentage of wastewater collected that gets treated in country, as a proxy for water quality;5. Long description of the data layer (that includes any data manipulation that has occurred, how to interpret it, and why; any further data manipulation required, how to interpret it, and why): Status of percentage of wastewater collected in countries that receives treatment, normalized by the population connected to wastewater treatment, at the national scale. This is a baseline estimation from Malik et al. 2014. Scores range from 0 to 1, with 0 being the poorest treatment rate performance and 1 being the best treatment rate performance. It is an index score. We collected this data in 2015 based on the publication of Malik et al. (2015). This may be a replacement for the status of “Clean Waters” or may be used as an additional pollution layer or replacement to “po_pathogens”; in any case ,it is analogous to the status of the percent of population with access to improved sanitation facilities data that were from the World Health Organization and United Nations Children's Fund's Joint Monitoring Programme.

This may be chose as a proxy for water quality due to lack of better global data; it is also a proxy for pathogen pollution and may be a factor for nutrient runoff. It represents a reported improvement in the JMP/WHO ‘Access to sanitation’ dataset because it accounts for recorded performance of water treatment rates globally, not just an approximation through surveys from UNICEF/JMP, in which pit latrines are counted as “Access” rather than connection to wastewater treatment facilities. Note, however, that these data are biased toward cities and urban areas that are part of the municipal wastewater infrastructure, and do not account for rural septic sanitation in most cases. In the future, if better time-series data were available for monitoring of point pollution sources, or more consitently reported wastewater treatment rates, that could also be used. 

Processing included using “dplyr” and “tidyr” in R. Population-weighted averaging was done for China, Guadeloupe, and Martinique. 6. The data source ( institution that collected the original data, or the institution providing the data if different from the original, the year it was accessed, the URL or publication reference): Malik, O. A., Hsu, A., Johnson, L. A., and Alex de Sherbinin. A global indicator of wastewater treatment to inform the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy. doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.01.005. Accessed May 2015.

(Malik, pers. communication, provided the .CSV)7. The years of data available: 2014 (MYRA); [OM: or 1990 - 2014 if using non-published time-series]; 
8. The units of data: percentage transformed into index score (unitless);9. Any other observations or explanations about the data: Processing included the function “dplyr” and “tidyr” from Hadley;


META. To address the challenge of inconsistent yearly observations from different countries, we created decadal averages from available data from 2000 to 2013 to derive single summary values of wastewater treatment and connection rate. If there were no values available for a country for 2000 to 2013, we used an average of available values for 1990 to 2000 to represent the summary wastewater treatment or connection rate value of that country. 
The orderÊof preference when merging datasets was: 1) OECD (2013); 2) the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD, 2011); 3) Pinsent-Masons (2011); and 4) the FAO Aquastat database 

META. META

Weighted averaging:

7.235 million 2014 estimate via WOlfram Alpha
